# What Happened to Adobe Flash

​	

​	Few technologies within the field of computer science make it into the public consciousness. For a piece of tech to become familiar to the average  internet user it must be incredibly prolific. Flash is one of these great few pieces of software. For a period of about ten years Adobe Flash was the face of the burgeoning modern internet. Flash provided innovative features that shaped the responsive browsing experience we know today. Features such as full motion animation, a customizable video player, and vector graphics. Yet despite its wide adoption Flash eventually died out. It is difficult to understand how something this massive and omnipresent completely disappeared. Flash was everywhere for years. It powered over half the interactive content on the web, and yet vanished overnight. 

### The History

​	The story of Flash begins at a meeting of a local Macintosh users' group in San Diego. The organizer, Charlie Jackson, had just recently started a new company, named Silicon Beach, focused on developing software for Apple computers. During the meeting Jackson announced his new company to the group along with his purchase of an Apple Lisa. At the end of his announcement a young man named Jonathan Gay introduced himself to Jackson. The pair hit it off immediately. Gay wanted to use the newly acquired Apple Lisa, and Jackson needed an employee for his new company. The two came to an agreement. Jackson would allow Gay free access to his Apple Lisa and in exchange Gay would develop games for him on royalty. Gay being a senior in high school was more concerned with free access to the Apple Lisa than money, and Jackson had no money to pay him with. 

​	Jonathan Gay would spend a couple of years as a part time developer at Silicon Beach. He developed three games during this time, Airborne!, Dark Castle, and Beyond Dark Castle. Out of the three Dark Castle became the most popular, eventually paying Gay’s way through college. After graduating high school Gay went off to study computer science at Harvey Mudd in California. After earning his degree he went back to work at Silicon Beach, this time as a full-time developer. After becoming full-time he would work on more robust applications. Most important of these applications was Superpaint 2. Superpaint 2 was a piece of graphics software which enabled users to create raster images and digital art. Raster images are a type of graphics rendering in which each pixel is saved as data to be rendered. These types of images are easier to encode but the file sizes are large. His experience working on Superpaint and dealing with the limitations of raster graphics would become critical during the development of flash. 

​	After a few years of working at Silicon Beach Gay began development on a new drawing program called Intellidraw. After initiating development he realized this new program was going to be a modest success. Upon this realization he decided to set out and start his own company. He came to Charlie Jackson with a proposition. He would need an initial investment for his company and he wanted Jackson to be his business partner. In January 1993 the two started their new company, FutureWave. The company would develop graphics software for a hot new type of computer. A computer many believed would start the next phase of the computer revolution.

​	This new form of computer was the pen operated computer. Like modern tablets these were touch screen devices operated via a stylus. FutureWave set out to be on the ground floor of the proto tablet revolution. They developed an animation/drawing tool called Smart Sketch for Penpoint OS. Smart Sketch allowed users to draw vector-based graphics and make simple animations. Notably users could also add buttons to provide simple user interaction. These buttons could change images or skip to frames in an animation. The user interface of Smart Sketch was well designed. Due to the pen operated nature of the devices the UI had to be simple. This restriction led to  the team working relentlessly on improving and simplifying the user experience of their product. This work on the interface along with the features made the company's first product was a success technically. The features were robust and Smart Sketch was well designed. Unfortunately, despite the program's warm reception Smart Sketch would be a bust. 

​	Developing for pen operated systems was not as profitable as the team hoped. In 1993, when the company was first founded, pen operated computing was touted to be the next step of human computer interaction. In many ways the groups claiming this were correct. Tablet computing seems like an obviously promising idea. Touch screens and stylus operated devices are one of, if not the most, common style computing today. So, what went wrong? The issue was not the idea. The problem was the implementation. The technology was still in its infancy. Manufacturers at the time were unable to properly  fulfill the vision they had promised. These early tablets were thick and heavy, they had low resolution monochrome displays and underpowered  processors. The screens were nonresponsive and relied on physical  presses on their surface to detect touches. This meant the screens required  constant calibration. The portly size, low power, and difficult to use screens led to a lackluster adoption of pen operated computers. In fact pen operated computing was such a failure at the time the operating system SmartSketch was developed for was purchased by AT&T and promptly canceled in 1994. The only notable sale of SmartSketch was to an architect designing Bill Gate's house.

	### The Internet

​	In 1995 FutureWave needed to pivot. The company realized that developing for pen operated systems was not financially viable, especially now that PenPoint OS was defunct. FutureWave had spent the past two years developing software for what was supposed to be the future of the industry, yet this very pursuit left the team in the dust. In the time they had spent focusing on Smart Sketch a massive paradigm shift happened. The internet was beginning to gain steam. By focusing on what they thought to be the future, the actual future slipped past them. Despite this, all was not lost. Smart Sketch was an excellent product. The tool had proved itself useful to illustrators and animators. Specifically, the tool was incredibly useful for rotoscoping, a style of animation in which the artist uses video footage as a stencil for drawing each frame. Smart Sketch also was developed to be incredibly efficient storage wise. Instead of relying on raster graphics like those SuperPaint the new program utilized vector graphics. Where raster images are composed of data describing each pixel, vector graphics define an image as mathematical functions. These vector image files took up less space because they described how to generate an image, not the actual image. When an image was to be viewed it would simply be interpreted by SmartSketch and drawn to the screen. This format was chosen due to the limitations of the portable pen computers. This format also had the business benefit of requiring the same software to create and view the images/animations. The usefulness of the tool, along with the tiny file size gave the team an idea. They could target the internet. 

​	The team simply ported Smart Sketch to existing desktops and developed a  browser plugin to view smart sketch files. Because the file sizes dwarfed those of raster images it was realistic for internet users to share animations over the limited modem connections of the time. The internet in 1995 consisted of static webpages. Simple HTML pages linked to one another through hyper links. In fact there were not any web scripting languages to speak of yet. Interactivity on the web was in its infancy and the team was entering the market at the perfect time. FutureWave saw the potentials of the market and took advantage of them. They launched FutureSplash as a plugin for NetScape in May 1996. The team had initially attempted to avoid selling their product directly but were unable to find buyers. Notable among the companies that rejected them was Adobe. Adobes rejection of FutureWave is notable because they eventually become the name most associated with the product eventually known as Flash.

​	The plugin would garner world wide success after being made a featured plugin by NetScape. This rocketed the visibility of FutureSplash and led to a much wider adoption than was anticipated. at the time FutureSplash was being developed by a three person team, with the entire company being made up of six people. The adoption was so wide that Microsoft based their entire MSN site on FutureSplash. Microsoft wanted to add interactivity and a television like appearance to the MSN site and chose FutureSplash as the driving force to do so. Another massive adoption for the company was the development of Disney Online. Disney chose to use FutureSplash on the site, a move that eventually led to Macromedia aquiring the company. After Macromedia's aqquisition the product was given the name were now familiar with. FutureSplash was renamed to Macromedia Flash, a shortened version of FutureSplash.

​	Despite being renamed the product was largely the same. Flash was still just  software for the creation of semi interactive vector animations and graphics. It wasn't until 1999 that Flash began to change into the fully featured design system it would become so notable for. In 1999 Flash intorduced Action Script. Action Script provided a method for adding more complex behaviour to Flash based sites. The new scripting language, based on EMCA script, enabled the creation of fully interactive sites. With the introduction of Action Script it was now possible to create games with Flash. The ability to use Flash as a game engine would propel its popularity to new heights. Internet users were now downloading the Flash plugin in droves to play/share new fully online games and animations. The Flash community was beginning to thrive.

​	The adoption of Flash was not without it's critics. In fact many of the longest lasting criticisms of Flash started to surface. Because of the proprietary nature of Flash files it was impossible for browsers to parse them. The Flash plugin was the key to decode and display the information these Flash based sites held. The issue with this model is that the site information becomes opaque. Browsers lose the ability to "peep" into a sites content,  the site information is only available to the Flash player. The inability to access the sites data made browser accessability features on Flash based sites impossible. Blind internet users had no way for their screen readers to interact with these sites. Another issue was SEO. SEO or Search Engine Optimization is the process search engines use to display sites based on keywords within them. Search engines constantly "crawl" through internet pages to index them and provide higher quality searches. For example with proper SEO searches for the name of a company can yield news articles related to the company, not just their main website. This was not possible with Flash based sites. These two problems would continue to haunt Flash for the rest of its lifetime. It's worth noting here that these two issues stem from the choice to keep the Flash player proprietary and closed source. The battle of closed source code versus open source code will continue to be a theme in the story of Flash until its eventual demise.

​	Despite these early problems Flash continued to gain popularity. While it was closed source it still provided features not yet present within the open web standard. One of these features was a video player. The video player provided by Flash was extensible as well as fully customizable. It could also stream content reletively quickly compared to other alternatives at the time. The customizable quality of the video player attracted many web developers to the platform. The most notable of which were three developers named Steve Chen, Chad Hurley and Jawed Karim. This team of three was comosed of recent ex-employees of PayPal. They had decided to leave their cushy jobs in the early months of 2005 and embark on a journey to found their own company. Their first project was a video based dating site. The site would be built around the new flash player video component. Users would submit videos of themselves on their profile page to attract prospective partners, similar to a video version of Tinder. Unfourtanately the team struggled to gain users. At one time they reportedly paid "attractive" women on craigslist to post videos of themselves to the site in an attempt to widen their user base. This genius strategy, surprisingly, failed.  Not to be deterred the team continued networking and scoping out investors. After deliberating on the future of their company they decided to scrap the dating aspect of the site, allowing users to post any kind of video. A descision inspired either by, issues finding footage of Janet Jackson nip slip during the 2004 Super Bowl half time show, or difficulties sharing videos from a dinner party they had attended. Both stories have been told by each founder at different moments in time. Regardless of which founder you choose to believe, the shift from dating site to general video service still occured. YouTube as we know it was born.

​	Steven Chen, Chad Hurely and Jawed Karim would eventually secure funding and begin to build a substantial user base. This success added expontentially to the adoption of Flash, as well as its reputation. Flash powered the first viral videos on the internet and garnered respect as a major web development platform. The video player component of Flash became the foundation for other video streaming sites, including Hulu and Vimeo. In fact so many websites used Flash as their primary video player that by the time Google purchased Youtube in 2006 many browsers were already including the Flash plugin by default. Many users weren't even aware of Flash being a seperate piece of software. Flash was simply a fundamental part of the internet. Earlier in 2005 Adobe finally saw the potential of Flash and purchased Macromedia for 3.4 billion dollars. Adobes acquisition shocked many in the tech community. Adobe had shown little interest in Flash initially, flat out declining to invest when they had the oppurtunity back in 1996. The acquisition was part of a larger campaign within the company to become a major player in the generation of internet content. This move, while risky, would prove lucrative for Adobe as Flash continued to grow.

​	By 2009 Flash was installed on 99% of computers. This wide spread adoption, while incredibly profitable for Adobe, began to show the cracks within the Flash platform. The problems with accessibility and SEO were compounded by newly emerging security issues. The massive popularity of Flash made it a promising attack vector for malware creators. Because Flash is proprietary it had no form of community to help with maintence or security for the platform. Adobe simply couldn't keep up with the amount of malicious "cracked" Flash players being pushed onto users. Adobe had to release constant udates to fight against bugs as well as security vunerabilities. Users became desensitized to the frequent updates the player required to remain secure. This desensitization led to users just accepting any Flash player update request the browser gave them. This blind acceptance led to an increase in users downloading malware under the guise of Flash player updates; an issue leading to more Flash player updates. Security within the Flash platform fell into a viscious cycle of performing updates to fight malware caused by fake updates, leading to users installing more fakes updates. The maintainers of Flash were simply out numbered by the quantity of malicious entities using their platform to attack users. Along with the security issues Flash simply wasn't able to keep up with the advances in mobile devices. Adobe had attempted to develop a mobile version of the Flash player for the Iphone at the prompting of Apple yet were unable to do so. The mobile version of Flash was simply too slow to be viable. Apple rejected the use of Flash on the new Iphone entirely, opting to invest in open web standards instead. Open web standards such as HTML and Javascript were simply more stable and secure due the large community of developers working to maintain them.

​	Despite these problems Android eventually opted to adopt the mobile Flash player. This move was made less out of love for the Flash platform and more as an attempt to have features the Iphone did not. At the time of Androids inclusion of the mobile player Flash powered an overwhelming portion of the interactive web. Many critics of the Iphone claimed that the new device was "missing out on the modern web" and that Apples decision would prove fatal. There was so much contreversy over Apples exclusion of Flash that Steve Jobs wrote an open letter in 2009 addressing these claims. In his open letter 

 